Distributed tracing 2.9 (#62410)
openshift/openshift-docs: distr_tracing/distr_tracing_rn/distr-tracing-rn-2-9.adoc

* Before this update, the wrong port was exposed for `jaeger-production-query`, resulting in refused connection. With this update, the issue is fixed by exposing the Jaeger Query gRPC port (16685) on the Jaeger Query deployment. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-2968[TRACING-2968])

* Before this update, when deploying Service Mesh on single-node OpenShift clusters in disconnected environments, the Jaeger Pod frequently went into the Pending state. With this update, the issue is fixed. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3312[TRACING-3312])

* Before this update, the Jaeger Operator Pod was restarting with the default memory value due to the *OOMKilled* error. With this update, this issue is fixed by removing the resource limits. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3173[TRACING-3173])

=== Known issues

* Apache Spark is not supported.
ifndef::openshift-rosa[]

* The streaming deployment via AMQ/Kafka is unsupported on IBM Z and IBM Power Systems.
endif::openshift-rosa[]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Missing images to run Operator in restricted network environments (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3173[TRACING-3523])

In the current {TempoName} CSV, references to the images of the operand are missing. To workaround this issue you need to specifically provide the Tempo operator related images in the mirroring tool so that the images can be mirrored to the registry.   

====
[source,yaml]
----
kind: ImageSetConfiguration
apiVersion: mirror.openshift.io/v1alpha2
archiveSize: 20                                                      
storageConfig:
  local:
    path: /home/user/images
mirror:
  operators:
  - catalog: registry.redhat.io/redhat/redhat-operator-index:v4.13
    packages:
    - name: tempo-product
      channels:
      - name: stable
  additionalImages:
  - name: registry.redhat.io/redhat/tempo-TODO:v4.13
----
====
```

Waiting to verify the package name, channel and the set of additionalImages.

:_content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="distributed-tracing-rn-2-9"]
= Release notes for {DTProductName} 2.9
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: distributed-tracing-rn-2-9

toc::[]

include::modules/distr-tracing-product-overview.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

> == Component versions in the {DTProductName} 2.9

Author: Done. Thank you.

[options="header"]
|===
|Operator |Component |Version
|{JaegerName}
|Jaeger
|1.47.0

|{OTELName}
|OpenTelemetry
|0.81.0

|{TempoName}
|Tempo
|2.1.1
|===

== {JaegerName}

=== New features and enhancements

* None.

//=== Technology Preview features
//not for 2.9

=== Bug fixes

> * Before this update, connection was refused due to a missing gRPC port on the `jaeger-query` deployment. This issue was causing the following error: *transport: Error while dialing: dial tcp :16685: connect: connection refused*. With this update, the Jaeger Query gRPC port (16685) is successfully exposed on the Jaeger Query service. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3322[TRACING-3322])

Reviewer 2: [System messages](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#system-messages)
```suggestion
* Before this update, connection was refused due to a missing gRPC port on the `jaeger-query` deployment. This issue resulted in `transport: Error while dialing: dial tcp :16685: connect: connection refused` error message. With this update, the Jaeger Query gRPC port (16685) is successfully exposed on the Jaeger Query service. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3322[TRACING-3322])
```

Author: Thank you. Applied manually.

* Before this update, the wrong port was exposed for `jaeger-production-query`, resulting in refused connection. With this update, the issue is fixed by exposing the Jaeger Query gRPC port (16685) on the Jaeger Query deployment. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-2968[TRACING-2968])

> * Before this update, when deploying Service Mesh on single-node OpenShift clusters in disconnected environments, the Jaeger Pod frequently went into the Pending state. With this update, the issue is fixed. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3312[TRACING-3312])

Reviewer 2: Using available attributes
```suggestion
* Before this update, when deploying {SMProductShortName} on {sno} clusters in disconnected environments, the Jaeger pod frequently went into the `Pending` state. With this update, the issue is fixed. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3312[TRACING-3312])
```

Author: Thank you. Applied manually.

> * Before this update, the Jaeger Operator Pod was restarting with the default memory value due to the *OOMKilled* error. With this update, this issue is fixed by removing the resource limits. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3173[TRACING-3173])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Before this update, the Jaeger Operator pod restarted with the default memory value due to the `reason: OOMKilled` error message. With this update, this issue is fixed by removing the resource limits. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3173[TRACING-3173])
```

Author: Thank you. Applied manually.

=== Known issues

* Apache Spark is not supported.
ifndef::openshift-rosa[]

* The streaming deployment via AMQ/Kafka is unsupported on IBM Z and IBM Power Systems.
endif::openshift-rosa[]

== {TempoName}

:FeatureName: The {TempoName}
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

=== New features and enhancements

> This release introduces the following noteworthy enhancements for the {TempoShortName}:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This release introduces the following enhancements for the {TempoShortName}:
```

Author: Thank you. Applied manually.

> * Support the link:https://operatorframework.io/operator-capabilities/[operator maturity] Level IV, Deep Insights, which enables upgrading, monitoring, and alerting of `TempoStack` instances and the {TempoOperator}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Support the link:https://operatorframework.io/operator-capabilities/[Operator maturity] Level IV, Deep Insights, which enables upgrading, monitoring, and alerting of `TempoStack` instances and the {TempoOperator}.
```

Author: Thank you. Already fixed in response to another comment.

> * Add Ingress and OpenShift Route configuration for the Gateway.

Reviewer 2: Should this be revised as follows?
```suggestion
* Add Ingress route and OpenShift route configuration for the Gateway.
```
Also, which specific Gateway are we talking about? There are a few.

Author: Thank you. Applied manually.

> * Support managed and unmanaged states in the `TempoStack` custom resource.

Reviewer 2: Are managed and unmanaged values for the state? If yes they should be in backticks

Author: Just checked with the developer, who confirmed that it's values indeed. Fixing. Thank you.

> * Expose the following additional ingestion protocols in the Distributor service: Jaeger Thrift binary, Jaeger Thrift compact, Jaeger gRPC, and Zipkin. When the Gateway is enabled, only the OTLP gRPC is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Expose the following additional ingestion protocols in the Distributor service: Jaeger Thrift binary, Jaeger Thrift compact, Jaeger gRPC, and Zipkin. When the Gateway is enabled, only the OTLP gRPC is enabled.
```
```suggestion
* Expose the following additional ingestion protocols in the Distributor service: Jaeger Thrift binary, Jaeger Thrift compact, Jaeger gRPC, and Zipkin. When the Gateway is enabled, only the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP) gRPC is enabled.
```

Author: Thank you. Applied manually.

* Expose the Jaeger Query gRPC endpoint on the Query Frontend service.

* Support multitenancy without Gateway authentication and authorization.

//=== Technology Preview features
//not for 2.9

=== Bug fixes

* Before this update, the {TempoOperator} was not compatible with disconnected environments. With this update, the {TempoOperator} supports disconnected environments. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3145[TRACING-3145])

* Before this update, the {TempoOperator} with TLS failed to start on {product-title}. With this update, the mTLS communication is enabled between Tempo components, the Operand starts successfully, and the Jaeger UI is accessible. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3091[TRACING-3091])

> * Before this update, the resource limits from the {TempoOperator} caused errors such as *OOMKilled*. With this update, the resource limits for the {TempoOperator} are removed to avoid such errors. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3204[TRACING-3204])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Before this update, the resource limits from the {TempoOperator} caused error messages such as `reason: OOMKilled`. With this update, the resource limits for the {TempoOperator} are removed to avoid such errors. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3204[TRACING-3204])
```

Author: Thank you. Applied manually. Memorizing error formatting.

=== Known issues

* Currently, the custom TLS CA option is not implemented for connecting to object storage. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3462[TRACING-3462])

> * Currently, when used with the {TempoOperator}, the Jaeger UI only displays services that have sent traces in the last 15 minutes. For services that did not send traces in the last 15 minutes, traces are still stored but not displayed in the Jaeger UI. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3139[TRACING-3139])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Currently, when used with the {TempoOperator}, the Jaeger UI only displays services that have sent traces in the last 15 minutes. For services that did not send traces in the last 15 minutes, traces are still stored, but not displayed in the Jaeger UI. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3139[TRACING-3139])
```

Author: I think I don't need a comma there.
This is like `traces are still stored and not displayed in the Jaeger UI`.

* Currently, the {TempoShortName} fails on the IBM Z (`s390x`) architecture. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3545[TRACING-3545])

* Currently, the Tempo query frontend service must not use internal mTLS when Gateway is not deployed. This issue does not affect the Jaeger Query API. The workaround is to disable mTLS. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3510[TRACING-3510])
+
.Workaround
:!example-caption:

> ====

Reviewer 2: This renders in a box because of  `====`. Removing [100](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/62410/files#diff-873c33bdf9e924d854fea381b46c0255c61aa4c7a7692920f3080389d7cdd56fR100) and [130](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/62410/files#diff-873c33bdf9e924d854fea381b46c0255c61aa4c7a7692920f3080389d7cdd56fR130) should fix it

Author: Thank you. Applied manually.

Disable mTLS as follows:

> . Open the {TempoOperator} ConfigMap for editing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Open the {TempoOperator} ConfigMap for editing by running the following command:
```
Related: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/62410#discussion_r1319128962

Author: Thank you. Already fixed in response to an earlier comment.

+

> [source,console]

Reviewer 2: Though this is valid and the official asciidoc suggests this `[source,console]`, the standard across ocp-docs is to use `[source,terminal]`
```suggestion
[source,terminal]
```

----
$ oc edit configmap tempo-operator-manager-config -n openshift-tempo-operator <1>
----
<1> The OpenShift project where the {TempoOperator} is installed.

> . Disable the mTLS in the Operator configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Disable the mTLS in the Operator configuration by updating the YAML file:
```
or 
To disable the mTLS, update the YAML file:

+
[source,yaml]
----
data:
  controller_manager_config.yaml: |
    featureGates:
      httpEncryption: false
      grpcEncryption: false
      builtInCertManagement:
        enabled: false
----

> . Restart the {TempoOperator} Pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Restart the {TempoOperator} pod by running the following command:
```

+

> [source,console]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[source,terminal]
```

Author: Thank you. Applied manually and also corrected in the other location in the same file.

----
$ oc rollout restart deployment.apps/tempo-operator-controller -n openshift-tempo-operator
----
====

* Missing images for running the {TempoOperator} in restricted environments. The {TempoName} CSV is missing references to the operand images. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3173[TRACING-3523])
+
.Workaround
:!example-caption:

> ====

Reviewer 2: This renders in a box because of `====`. Removing [136](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/62410/files#diff-873c33bdf9e924d854fea381b46c0255c61aa4c7a7692920f3080389d7cdd56fR136) and [162](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/62410/files#diff-873c33bdf9e924d854fea381b46c0255c61aa4c7a7692920f3080389d7cdd56fR162) should fix it

Author: Thank you. Applied manually.

Add the {TempoOperator} related images in the mirroring tool to mirror the images to the registry:

[source,yaml]
----
kind: ImageSetConfiguration
apiVersion: mirror.openshift.io/v1alpha2
archiveSize: 20
storageConfig:
  local:
    path: /home/user/images
mirror:
  operators:
  - catalog: registry.redhat.io/redhat/redhat-operator-index:v4.13
    packages:
    - name: tempo-product
      channels:
      - name: stable
  additionalImages:
  - name: registry.redhat.io/rhosdt/tempo-rhel8@sha256:e4295f837066efb05bcc5897f31eb2bdbd81684a8c59d6f9498dd3590c62c12a
  - name: registry.redhat.io/rhosdt/tempo-gateway-rhel8@sha256:b62f5cedfeb5907b638f14ca6aaeea50f41642980a8a6f87b7061e88d90fac23
  - name: registry.redhat.io/rhosdt/tempo-gateway-opa-rhel8@sha256:8cd134deca47d6817b26566e272e6c3f75367653d589f5c90855c59b2fab01e9
  - name: registry.redhat.io/rhosdt/tempo-query-rhel8@sha256:0da43034f440b8258a48a0697ba643b5643d48b615cdb882ac7f4f1f80aad08e
----

====

== {OTELName}

:FeatureName: The {OTELName}
include::snippets/technology-preview.adoc[leveloffset=+1]

=== New features and enhancements

> This release introduces the following noteworthy enhancements for the {OTELShortName}:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This release introduces the following enhancements for the {OTELShortName}:
```

Author: Thank you. Already fixed in response to another comment.

* Support OTLP metrics ingestion. The metrics can be forwarded and stored in the `user-workload-monitoring` via the Prometheus exporter.

* Support the link:https://operatorframework.io/operator-capabilities/[operator maturity] Level IV, Deep Insights, which enables upgrading and monitoring of `OpenTelemetry Collector` instances and the {OTELOperator}.

> * Report traces and metrics from remote clusters using OTLP/HTTP(s).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Report traces and metrics from remote clusters using OTLP or HTTP and HTTPS.
```

Author: Thank you. Applied manually.

> * Collect {product-title} resource attributes via the `resourcedetection` processor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Collect {product-title} resource attributes by using the `resourcedetection` processor.
```

Author: In this case, I remember checking that the use of `via` here is correct.

> * Support managed and unmanaged states in the `OpenTelemetryCollector` custom resouce.

Reviewer 2: naged and unmanaged values for the state? If yes they should be in backticks

Author: Just checked a developer who confirmed that it's values indeed. Fixing. Thank you.

//=== Technology Preview features
//not for 2.9

=== Bug fixes

> * Before this update, the {OTELOperator} was crashlooping after receiving `opentelemetry-operator.v0.74.0-5`. With this update, the issue is fixed by configuring the autoscaler. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3190[TRACING-3190])

Reviewer 2: Should `autoscaler` be `cluster autoscaler`?
```suggestion
* Before this update, the {OTELOperator} was crashlooping after receiving `opentelemetry-operator.v0.74.0-5`. With this update, the issue is fixed by configuring the autoscaler. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3190[TRACING-3190])
```

Author: @iblancasa, is this about configuring the horizontal pod autoscaler?

```suggestion
* Before this update, the {OTELOperator} was crashlooping after receiving `opentelemetry-operator.v0.74.0-5`. With this update, the issue is fixed by configuration of the horizontal pod autoscaler. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3190[TRACING-3190])
```

Reviewer 3: There is a description of the problem here https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/issues/1799

The HPA  can be configured using the  `.spec.minReplicas` and `.spec.maxReplicas` fields (those are deprecated). It should be done using the fields under `.spec.autoscaler`. During one refactor of the HPA logic, the `.spec.minReplicas` and `.spec.maxReplicas` fields were not taken into account, making the upgrade from one version to another to fail.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion.
Luckily, now that we've looked more in-depth into this release note, we can drop it.
Removing it.

=== Known issues

> * Currently, you must manually set link:https://operatorframework.io/operator-capabilities/[operator maturity] to Level IV, Deep Insights. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3431[TRACING-3431])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Currently, you must manually set link:https://operatorframework.io/operator-capabilities/[Operator maturity] to Level IV, Deep Insights. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/TRACING-3431[TRACING-3431])
```

Author: Thank you. Applied manually.
